[exporter/elasticsearch] Use confighttp.ClientConfig (#33367)
open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib: exporter/elasticsearchexporter/README.md

may be specified as a comma-separated list via the `ELASTICSEARCH_URL`
environment variable.

Elasticsearch credentials may be configured via [Authentication configuration](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector/blob/main/config/configauth/README.md#authentication-configuration) (`configauth`) settings.
As a shortcut, the following settings are also supported:

- `user` (optional): Username used for HTTP Basic Authentication.
- `password` (optional): Password used for HTTP Basic Authentication.
- `api_key` (optional):  Authorization [API Key](https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/elasticsearch/reference/current/security-api-create-api-key.html) in "encoded" format.

Example:

```yaml
exporters:
  elasticsearch:
    endpoint: https://elastic.example.com:9200
    auth:
      authenticator: basicauth

extensions:
  basicauth:
    username: elastic
    password: changeme

······

service:
  extensions: [basicauth]
  pipelines:
    logs:
      receivers: [otlp]
      processors: [batch]
      exporters: [elasticsearch/log]
    traces:
      receivers: [otlp]
      exporters: [elasticsearch/trace]
      processors: [batch]
```

## Advanced configuration

### HTTP settings

> The Elasticsearch exporter supports common [HTTP Configuration Settings](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector/tree/main/config/confighttp#http-configuration-settings), except for `compression` (all requests are gzip-compressed).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Elasticsearch exporter supports common [HTTP Configuration Settings](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector/tree/main/config/confighttp#http-configuration-settings), except for `compression` (all requests are uncompressed).
```

CompressionLevel is not specified and defaults to 0 now, see newBulkIndexer function in `elasticsearch_bulk.go`.

Author: Oof, ok, thanks. Good opportunity for us to compare docappender's integrated compression against the more modular confighttp compressor.

## Configuration options

Exactly one of the following settings is required:

- `endpoint` (no default): The target Elasticsearch URL to which data will be sent
  (e.g. `https://elasticsearch:9200`)
- `endpoints` (no default): A list of Elasticsearch URLs to which data will be sent
- `cloudid` (no default): The [Elastic Cloud ID](https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/cloud/current/ec-cloud-id.html)
  of the Elastic Cloud Cluster to which data will be sent (e.g. `foo:YmFyLmNsb3VkLmVzLmlvJGFiYzEyMyRkZWY0NTY=`)

> If none of the above attributes are specified, one or more Elasticsearch URLs

Author: > ^^ p.s. I'm more used to env variables overriding, so even when they are set, they would be ignored on env. If that's the case in the logic, we need to change the docs accordingly.

I am too, but that's not how it works at the moment. This behaviour comes from go-elasticsearch: https://github.com/elastic/go-elasticsearch/blob/de21bec3133f09d8821c3a57c2782d25417fdfed/elasticsearch.go#L171-L175

IMO we should get rid of this in a future change, and expect users to use standard OTel Collector mechanisms for overriding config: https://opentelemetry.io/docs/collector/configuration/#override-settings

> If none of the above attributes are specified, one or more Elasticsearch URLs

Author: > Since I suggested to inline the round-robin part into the attribute desc, if that makes sense to do, we can remove the repeat about round-robin

:+1: will do

Example:

```yaml
exporters:
  elasticsearch:
    endpoint: https://elastic.example.com:9200
    auth:
      authenticator: basicauth

extensions:
  basicauth:
    username: elastic
    password: changeme

······

service:
  extensions: [basicauth]
  pipelines:
    logs:
      receivers: [otlp]
      processors: [batch]
      exporters: [elasticsearch/log]
    traces:
      receivers: [otlp]
      exporters: [elasticsearch/trace]
      processors: [batch]
```

## Advanced configuration

### HTTP settings

The Elasticsearch exporter supports common [HTTP Configuration Settings](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector/tree/main/config/confighttp#http-configuration-settings), except for `compression` (all requests are uncompressed).
As a consequence of supporting `confighttp`, the Elasticsearch exporter also supports common [TLS Configuration Settings](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector/blob/main/config/configtls/README.md#tls-configuration-settings).

The Elasticsearch exporter sets `timeout` (HTTP request timeout) to 90s by default.

> All other defaults are as defined by `confighttp`.

Author: I was trying to stick to linking once on first reference (though to fair I didn't actually use the `confighttp` ref above). I'll play with it and see if it's too many links, or otherwise reference properly above.

### Queuing

The Elasticsearch exporter supports the common [`sending_queue` settings](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector/blob/main/exporter/exporterhelper/README.md), however the sending queue is currently disabled by default.

### Elasticsearch document routing

Telemetry data will be written to signal specific data streams by default:

> logs will be written to `logs-generic-default`, and traces will be written to

Author: I'll revise this slightly to "logs to the stream `logs-generic-default`, and traces to ..."

  (e.g. `https://elasticsearch:9200`)
- `endpoints` (no default): A list of Elasticsearch URLs to which data will be sent,
  attempted in round-robin order
- `cloudid` (no default): The [Elastic Cloud ID](https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/cloud/current/ec-cloud-id.html)
  of the Elastic Cloud Cluster to which data will be sent (e.g. `foo:YmFyLmNsb3VkLmVzLmlvJGFiYzEyMyRkZWY0NTY=`)

When the above settings are missing, `endpoints` will default to the
comma-separated `ELASTICSEARCH_URL` environment variable.

Elasticsearch credentials may be configured via [Authentication configuration][configauth] settings.
As a shortcut, the following settings are also supported:

- `user` (optional): Username used for HTTP Basic Authentication.
- `password` (optional): Password used for HTTP Basic Authentication.
- `api_key` (optional): [Elasticsearch API Key] in "encoded" format.

Example:

```yaml
exporters:
  elasticsearch:
    endpoint: https://elastic.example.com:9200
    auth:
      authenticator: basicauth

extensions:
  basicauth:
    username: elastic
    password: changeme

······

service:
  extensions: [basicauth]
  pipelines:
    logs:
      receivers: [otlp]
      processors: [batch]

>       exporters: [elasticsearch/log]

Reviewer 2: You reference `elasticsearch/log` name here (and `elasticsearch/trace` name below), but only define a single `elasticsearch` exporter instance above. Perhaps worth making the configuration more consistent?

Author: Oops, good catch. I'll replace `elasticsearch/log` and `elasticsearch/trace` with a single `elasticsearch` exporter.

Reviewer 2: @carsonip I don't think that's a problem. The persistent queue creates separate storage files for each signal.

See for example with the OTLP/HTTP exporter:

```yaml
exporters:
  otlphttp:
    endpoint: "http://localhost:4318"
    sending_queue:
      storage: file_storage
extensions:
  file_storage:
    directory: .
receivers:
  otlp:
    protocols:
      grpc:
service:
  extensions: [file_storage]
  pipelines:
    logs:
      exporters: [otlphttp]
      receivers: [otlp]
    traces:
      exporters: [otlphttp]
      receivers: [otlp]
```

When you run the collector with this config:

```shell
otelcol-contrib --config config.yaml
```

you'll see two separate storage files created:

```shell
$ ls exporter_otlphttp__* 
exporter_otlphttp__logs  exporter_otlphttp__traces
```

Reviewer 2: On a second thought, definitely worth checking if this is "built-in" behavior of the queue or needs some special handling in the exporter.

Reviewer: Nice! Thanks for confirming. Sorry for the confusion.

    traces:
      receivers: [otlp]
      exporters: [elasticsearch/trace]
      processors: [batch]
```

> ## Advanced configuration

Reviewer 2: I love how you extracted the required configuration properties (`endpoint` and related) to a separate subsection. I think this makes the documentation much easier to grasp. :heart:

Author: Glad you think so!

- `retry`: Elasticsearch bulk request retry settings
  - `enabled` (default=true): Enable/Disable request retry on error. Failed requests are retried with exponential backoff.
  - `max_requests` (default=3): Number of HTTP request retries.
  - `initial_interval` (default=100ms): Initial waiting time if a HTTP request failed.
  - `max_interval` (default=1m): Max waiting time if a HTTP request failed.
  - `retry_on_status` (default=[429, 500, 502, 503, 504]): Status codes that trigger request or document level retries. Request level retry and document level retry status codes are shared and cannot be configured separately. To avoid duplicates, it is recommended to set it to `[429]`. WARNING: The default will be changed to `[429]` in the future.

### Elasticsearch node discovery

The Elasticsearch Exporter will regularly check Elasticsearch for available nodes.
Newly discovered nodes will automatically be used for load balancing.
Settings related to node discovery are:

- `discover`:
  - `on_start` (optional): If enabled the exporter queries Elasticsearch
    for all known nodes in the cluster on startup.
  - `interval` (optional): Interval to update the list of Elasticsearch nodes.

> Node discovery can be disabled by setting `discover.interval` to 0.

Author: Maybe, but I would rather get this change in and iterate - I don't know the exact behaviour, and wouldn't want to block the rest of the improvements on researching.

> Node discovery can be disabled by setting `discover.interval` to 0.

Reviewer 3: yeah I agree with you. it helps that the PR describes the change, for visibility. in hindsight, this suggestion was out-of-scope!
